---
permalink: /projects
title: ""
excerpt: "Projects"
author_profile: true
---

# Ongoing

<a name="narratives"></a>
## • Narratives for Music Information Retrieval

{% include base_path %}

Musical tracks, or songs, are independent entities. Even so, songs are connected by hidden links behind the bare audio wave. **Dave** is a Research prototype by Giovanni Gabbolini and [Derek Bridge](http://www.cs.ucc.ie/~dgb/), and is designed to unveil such links, or segues. Dave's segues strive to be enjoyable, sometimes by being informative, and sometimes by being funny.

Dave works by abstracting songs in a Knowledge Graph. In this abstraction, segues are paths from one song to another. We get back from the abstraction
by translating paths to text. Pivotal to our contribution is the introduction of a scoring function for segues, based on interestingness.
Dave can generate segues of 1553 different types!

**Play with Dave**
Click the Spin button, and check out segues generated by Dave from pairs of randomly-chosen songs.

{% include segue.html %}

<a name="instability"></a>
## • Recommender systems and instability
Recommender systems automatically suggests item to users, for example songs or films. In this project, jointly with Edoardo D'Amico (UCD) and the [RecSys@PoliMi](http://recsys.deib.polimi.it/) group, we investigate the stability of recommenders. We consider a recommender to be stable if, when fed with the same data in input, output the same recommendations.

We find that well known Matrix Factorization recommenders are highly unstable, especially for non popular items. We introduce a new family of algorithms that generalize Matrix Factorizations. The new algorithms are more stable, and have better accuracy on the long-tail.

This project was the subject of a paper and of my M.Sc thesis:
> Giovanni Gabbolini, Edoardo D'Amico, Cesare Bernardis, Paolo Cremonesi: **On the instability of embeddings for recommender systems: the case of Matrix Factorization**, *Procs. of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing*, 2021. (TO APPEAR, [Preprint](files/NNMF_preprint.pdf))

> Giovanni Gabbolini, Edoardo D'Amico: **Exploiting the Long Tail Recommending Less of More, Nearest Neighbors Matrix Factorization**, PoliTesi ([link](http://hdl.handle.net/10589/152210))

**[Source code](https://github.com/damicoedoardo/NNMF)**

# Past
<a name="past"></a>

## • ACM RecSys Challenge 2019
I participated to the RecSys Challenge 2019 as a member of the PoliCloud8 team, inside the [RecSys@PoliMi](http://recsys.deib.polimi.it/) group.

The challenge, sponsored by Trivago, focused on travel metasearch. We had to develop a session-based and context-aware recommender system using various input data to provide a list of accommodations matching user needs. We were given a dataset of $20$M interactions, $1$M users and $1$M accommodations.

In the final [leaderboard](https://recsys.trivago.cloud/leaderboard/leaderboard), **our team ranked in the $10^{th}$ position over $575$ teams**.
Our solution was based on a stacked ensemble of three algorithms powered by over $200$ handcrafted features.
We explain in details our solution to the challenge in a paper, published at RecSys:

> Edoardo D’Amico, **Giovanni Gabbolini**, Daniele Montesi, Matteo Moreschini, Federico Parroni, Federico Piccinini, Alberto Rossettini, Alessio Russo Introito, Cesare Bernardis, and Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema. 2019. **Leveraging laziness, Browsing-Pattern Aware Stacked Models for Sequential Accommodation Learning to Rank**, *Procs. of the ACM Recommender Systems Challenge 2019*, 2019.

**[Source code](https://github.com/keyblade95/recsys2019)**
